BASIC HOUSE RULES AND REGULATIONS

I. NATURE AND PURPOSE

The following house rules and regulations must be observed for the purpose of ensuring the general welfare and well-being of the residents throughout their stay in the university dormitories. The implementation of these rules aims to foster a harmonious housing, environment conducive to intellectual growth, promote sound psycho-social development, and encourage responsible behavior and accountability among residents by establishing clear expectations and standards.

II. GENERAL PROVISIONS

1. The rules and regulations outlined herein are applicable to all accepted residents in the UPV dormitories and shall remain in effect throughout the duration of the semester, Residents are required to renew this agreement for subsequent term/s.

2. Upon admission, the resident shall be furnished with a study table, chair, locker, and bed with mattress. He/she is responsible for maintaining the cleanliness and tidiness of
his/her room, as well as using the facilities, furniture, and properties of the hall with care.

3. Residents are not allowed to transfer occupancy from room to another without prior permission from the Dormitory Manager. Likewise, the dorm management reserves the right to change room assignments of the residents, when necessary.

4, Residents may be required to transfer or vacate rooms during repainting, repair, general cleaning, disinfection, or maintenance is to be undertaken.

5. Residents are expected to promptly pay their dormitory fees per semester, following the specified payment schedule.

6. Residents are required to comply with the dormitory's policies on signing in and out, observing curfew hours, securing necessary permits, and following visitation guidelines and health protocols.

7. Residents shall cooperate with the residence hall management in maintaining the safety, cleanliness, peace, and orderliness of the halls and help in making it an ideal place to live.

8. Residents are expected to cooperate with the resident monitoring system conducted by the dorm management to check whether all residents are inside the residence hall.
9. Residents shall join the dormitory’s online group or other modes for constant communication with the dorm staff and house council officers to receive updates and announcements from the management and other relevant offices.

III. SPECIFIC RULES AND REGULATIONS

1. Signing In and Out

Residents who leave the hall and its premises for purposes other than to attend their classes are required to sign out properly in the hall’s logbook, likewise, to sign in upon their return. Residents should indicate in the logbook their destination, purpose, contact person, telephone number, time of departure, companion(s) if any, and expected day/time of return.

2. Observance of Curfew Hours

The main door shall be opened at 5:30 a.m. Curfew starts at 9:00 p.m. and shall be strictly observed. Residents who wish to stay out beyond 9:00 p.m. should secure either a Late Permit or an Overnight Permit, depending on the length of time they wish to be out beyond the curfew hours.

3. Permits

Residents who plan to stay outside the dormitory until 11:00PM must file a Late Permit. Those who will stay outside until the morning of the following day must file an Overnight Permit. Those who wish to spend their weekends or weekdays for more than one night, outside the dormitory, must secure a Weekend permit. All permits must be secured before 6:00 p.m. and should be filed in person.

For residents below 18 years old, approval of permits shall be based on the conditions authorized by parents in the Parents Instruction Sheet.

4. Silence in the Hall

To create an atmosphere conducive to study all throughout the day, residents and guests should tone down the volume of their gadgets and musical instruments, as well as avoid overly loud talk and scandalously boisterous laughter. This rule must be observed especially inside rooms, along corridors and in study areas. Moreover, the 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. silent hours shall be strictly observed.

5. Visits and Social Calls

To maintain order and safety in the hall as well as to secure the resident's general well-being, visits and social calls shall be regulated as follows:

a. Visitors and callers shall be entertained from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. only. Visitors who wish to stay beyond the period indicated should first secure the approval of the Dormitory Manager or the staff in-charge. Should they wish to stay overnight, however, they shall be accommodated at the transient’s room and shall be required to pay in full and in advance the transient fee.

b. Residents shall be responsible for any violation of house rules and regulations committed by their guest/s during the latter’s stay at the residence hall.

c. Non-residents are not allowed to stay overnight inside the rooms of the residents.

d. Calls and visits made outside of schedule are subject to the approval of the Dormitory Manager and the Staff-In-Charge. Exempted from these rules are visits by parents, relatives, guardians, as well as urgent long distance and emergency calls.

e. Visitors and service deliveries (i.e. laundry, food, parcels, etc.) are to be entertained only at the lobby. Parents, relatives and guardians, may visit the residents in their rooms provided permission of either the Dormitory Manager or the Staff-In-Charge is first secured.

6. Personal Hygiene and Appearance

Residents are encouraged to observe personal hygiene and overall cleanliness, particularly in shared spaces. Residents are also expected to appear properly attired in the lobby, office, and the common dining hall. Wearing of clothes that are too revealing are prohibited in these areas.

7. Room and Corridor Upkeep

Residents are responsible for maintaining the cleanliness and tidiness of their rooms and corridors. Any improvement involving permanent or extensive alteration or modification of the physical design and/or configuration of the room or corridor, including any furniture or property of the hall therein, must, however, be subject to prior approval of the Dormitory Manager.

8. Use and Care of Facilities

Residents are expected to take care in using the facilities, furniture, and properties of the hall. Should a resident, either intentionally or otherwise, destroy, deface any of the latter, he/she shall bear the full cost of repair or replacement provided, however, this should be without prejudice to any other sanctions or set of sanctions that the management or the University may deem appropriate to impose.

The rule is qualified as follows: if the damaged or defaced property is a part of or has been issued to a particular room, wing, or any of the common areas, and no violator comes forward to own responsibility for the damage, the full cost of either repair or replacement shall be COLLECTIVELY borne by all the occupants of that room, wing, or all the residents through the House Council, respectively.

No piece of furniture or dormitory property shall be moved from one place to another without permission from the Dormitory Manager or Staff-In-Charge.
9. Use of Appliances

Residents intending to use appliance/s at the dormitory shall be required to sign an Appliance Declaration Form.

A uniform rate for each appliance shall be charged as shall be determined by the Office of Student Affairs upon consultation with the residents through the General Assembly. These rates shall be subject to an annual review to reflect the rate adjustments recommended by CDMO with approval from UPV Fiscal Policies and Operations Committee (FPOC).

The presence of undeclared or prohibited appliances such as electric flat iron, television set, hair dryer/blower/curling and straightening iron, electric heater/kettle, rice cooker, oven toaster, refrigerator, coffee maker, air fryer, microwave oven, and other appliances which consume large amount of electricity inside a resident's room shall be confiscated and may be sufficient cause for denial of future accommodation and/or cancellation of residence hall privileges. The use of appliances which may pose a fire hazard is prohibited.

10. Use of Bathroom, Washroom and Sink

Cleanliness, proper hygiene, and due consideration for other users shall be required of all residents in the use of these facilities. The following shall be strictly observed:

a. Toilets must be flushed after use and their seats left clean and dry;

b. Sanitary napkins, stones, eggshells, bottle caps and other such objects should never be flushed down toilets;

c. Only light washing of intimate clothing is allowed and should not be left for soaking in washrooms; and

d. Dishes and eating utensils shall be washed inside the washrooms only and not to. be kept there or left unattended/unwashed.

11. Cooking and Laundry Activities

Residents are not allowed to cook food nor heat water in their rooms or any area within the dormitory. Heating of food is only allowed using kitchen appliances provided by the dormitory. Guidelines for the use of such must be strictly followed.

Laundry activities, except for undergarments, are strictly prohibited in the bathrooms. Designated washrooms and hanging areas are provided specifically for light washing of intimate clothing. For laundry services, residents shall transact business with duly authorized laundry service providers at the designated time and place set for such purpose,

12. Bringing in, Keeping, Tending Pets/Animals

Keeping pets and laboratory specimens in the residence hall is prohibited. Feeding stray animals within the dormitory premises is discouraged. Residents shall be solely liable for the damage and injury resulting from the violation of the rule against keeping pets or animals within the residence hall.
13. Payment of Lodging and Appliance Fees

The residence hall lodging and appliance fees are on a semestral basis. However, this may be divided into four (4) installments to facilitate payment. The resident is required to follow the installment payment schedules as follows:

40% upon check in (first and last months)
20% on or before the 15th of the succeeding month (2nd month)
20% on or before the 15th of the succeeding month (3rd month)
20% on or before the 15th of the succeeding month (4th month)

The lodging period constitutes the time designated by the University semester/trimester/midyear and shall cover the first day of registration and three days after the last day of the final examinations. Before and after this period, transient and appliance fees for regular room accommodations will be charged accordingly.

Lodging and appliance fees for the midyear term shall be equivalent to 4 of the semestral fee and shall be paid in full upon admission.

Failure to settle dormitory accounts/rentals for two consecutive months shall be issued a written reminder. If the resident does not settle his/ her account by the end of the semester, any unpaid dormitory fees will be recorded through his/her CRS account as an accountability. For graduating students and those applying for Leave of Absence (LOA), the dormitory manager shall not sign his/her University clearance until his/her account has been cleared.

14. Checking Out

Residents shall return all residence property issued to them to the dorm custodian, remove all personal effects from their rooms and settle all legitimate obligations with the residence hall authorities not later than the last day of lodging accommodation for the semester.

IV. CONDUCT AND DISCIPLINE

1. Residents shall respect the peace and privacy of their co-residents and observe proper decorum at all times within the residence hall. They are expected to behave decently and in a socially acceptable and appropriate manner. They must also be cooperative, considerate and respectful at all times.

2. The following acts, categorized as lesser form of misconduct, are prohibited:

a. Bringing in, using, and/or doing the following:
- Intoxicating liquors or drinks;
- Firecrackers and other pyrotechnics;
- Gambling;
- Pornographic materials;
- Brazen public display of sexual intimacy or affection;

b. Smoking and vaping in places other than those designated as smoking areas

c. Cooking, heating, or steaming food and water in the room or any part of the hall except in designated areas;
d. Stealing or using someone else’s property without the owner's consent;

e. Bringing in non-residents beyond allowable areas and visiting, hours or letting them sleep in the room without permission from the residence head;

f. Transferring to another room without prior permission from the dormitory personnel;

g. Non-filing of permits;

h. Frequent infractions of rules on signing in/out and curfew non-compliance

i. Non-observance of health and safety protocols; and

j. Any form of qualified dishonesty and/or misconduct.

3. Cases of serious/grave misconduct punishable by outright ejection, pending a fair and thorough investigation and assessment of the evidence, include, but are not limited to, the following:

a. Destruction of the facilities and/or any part of the hall;

b. Misbehavior such as fighting, insubordination, and/or gross disrespect to other residents and dormitory personnel;

c. Carrying, possessing, and/or using firearms, deadly weapons, prohibited drugs or chemicals;

d. Drunken behavior or breach of peace;

e. Unauthorized use of fire exits and windows as entrance and/or exits of students.

f. Serious/grave forms of misconduct such as theft, vandalism, bullying, and sexual harassment.

4. Sanctions against lesser form of misconduct, as well as all other violations of these rules and regulations are as follows:

a. First Violation - Written Reminder

b. Second Violation (whichever is applicable)
1. Letter of reprimand/warning. Parents or Guardian shall be furnished a copy.
2. Curtailment of dormitory privileges.

c. Third Violation - Ejection Notice without prejudice to any other disciplinary action
that may be taken against the erring resident.

5. The Staff on duty must submit an incident report to the Dormitory Manager on any violation or prohibited acts committed by the residents. Disciplinary actions involving violation of residence halls rules shall be enacted upon completion of due process, noted by the OSA Director. The University’s decision, having undergone due process, is final, executory and irreversible. The OSA director may further recommend an escalation of the matter to the next appropriate adjudicating authorities within the University.

V. SECURITY & SAFETY MEASURES AND HEALTH PROTOCOLS

1. Residents must familiarize themselves with emergency evacuation plans and
emergency hotlines for reporting emergencies and safety concerns.

2. Residents are expected to cooperate with the management in the adoption of measures to prevent fire accidents and/or theft, as well as mechanisms to avoid the spread of communicable diseases. They are expected to participate in drills and training sessions organized by the University such as earthquake, fire drills, disaster management, etc.

3. Residents are required to adhere to health protocols, including proper hygiene practices and compliance with any specific measures during health crises.

4. Residents are advised to secure personal belongings while inside the residence halls. The residence hall management shall not assume responsibility for the loss of any personal items.

5. Residents shall recognize the authority of the residence head to inspect their rooms and lockers when circumstances warrant it for the purpose of checking safety provisions. Inspections will be conducted in the presence of one or two witnesses.

6. Residents shall immediately inform the Dormitory Manager or assistant if they are sick. They shall regularly update their parents’ or guardian’s contact details on record for emergency purposes and keep them informed about their health and condition during their stay in the campus.

VI. MATTERS AT THE PRUDENT DISCRETION OF THE RESIDENCE HEAD

1. To provide for flexibility in the management of the dormitory, the Dormitory Manager shall have authority over the following matters, in consultation with the House Council, if necessary:

a. Schedules and rules governing use of amenities and services such as television, hot water service, and laundry service;

b. Assignment or designation of available areas/facilities (e.g. meditation room, inner court, etc.) for purposes that are consistent with existing rules, regulations and policies; and

c. Adoption of supplementary security and health measures that are consistent with existing rules, regulations, and policies.

d. Residents facing problems at the dormitory may approach the Dormitory Manager or any personnel they are most comfortable with. In cases where the problems may remain unresolved, the matter shall be referred to the proper authority such as the Guidance Counselor or OSA Director.